                                - 1 -
                       Mathematician and Mavka

     Sometime in Time and somewhere in Where lived  Mathematician.  To
tell the   truth  he  was  just  studying  Mathematics,  but  everyone
nicknamed him this way.  It was not too surprising as whenever you saw
him  he was peering into a very thick volume or discoursing sentencies
no one understood.

     But something  had  happened  to   him,   for   for   hours   sat
Mathematician motionlessly,  stooped  like  an  Integral Sign and pale
like the Tabula Tasa.

     "He must be constructing the  sophisticated  proof  of  the  Last
Fermat's Theorem metausing metaboolean metasemantics",  - observed one
respectable Professor of Mathematics.

     "He must be searching the transcendental inner Universe  for  the
irrational sense  of  Existence  of Not-Being",  - disagreed in no way
less respectable Professor of Philosophy.

     This two Professors always had  different  points  of  view  and,
therefore, were always arguing.

     "He's simply  terribly  in love - that is what is",  - remarked a
little passing-by  girl,  wondering  how  these  scholars  could   not
understand the simpliest things.

     Strangely enough, the both Professors agreed each with other that
the girl's words were nonsense and  that  what  was  called  Love  was
absurdity which   could  never  happen,  especially  to  someone  like
Mathematician.  But their consent lasted not long and one minute later
they  had  another  quarrel  over  the  definition  of  Love  and  its
classification and symptoms.

     They were discorsing and Mathematician was suffering.  From Love.
Love which brings a Pain and is a painful Medicine for this Pain, Love
which makes you the Wealthiest when not making you the  Poorest,  Love
which blossoms like a Rose, but lets you not touch the Rose because of
the thorns.

     All was much more hopeless as he was in Love with Mavka - one  of
that tribe of tale-folks.

     Once they had been a numerous and prosperous beings. The Writers,
Singers, Painters or Tellers had been writing,  singing,  painting  or
telling about  wonders  of  the  World.  About  Witch  dancing  at the
moonless night, about Fairy living at a desk drawer, about the King of
the Sea drowning nearby vessels when yawning, about Cinderella waiting

                                - 2 -
for a Cinderprince.

     But the mankind had discovered Mathematics,  Physics,  Philosophy
and  Chemistry.  It  had  been  mathematically proved that none of the
above folks existed.  Everything was classified,  numerated,  taken to
atoms and composed back. In this nomenclature there were no places for
the  tale-folks.  To  speak  in  educated  society   about   Mermaids,
Magicians, Elves, and so forth was at least indecent.

     Driven away,  neglected, offended they had hidden in impenetrable
Forests, the  dippest crefts of the Sea bed,  or denied and forgot the
best they possesed - their fairness, unnoticebly living among people.

     So, Mathematician loved Mavka.  In theory she existed not, but in
reality she was as fair as any other mother's child. Her eyes like two
little ponds  reflected the blue skies and puffy puffs of clouds.  And
what treasures were hidden  in  the  depth  of  the  ponds!  Her  lips
resembled two  red petals at Dawn when smiling,  and two red petals at
Sunset when crying.  And they always resembled  two  petals  at  Dawn.
Her cheeks and hands were ivory-made, but not a minute could they keep
quiet. Gilted was the hair like golden leaves in Autumn,  and  like  a
Spring waterstream it could be looked on for ever and for ever.

     She called  the  old willow-tree her Mother,  and Summer Wind her
Father. Each Autunm the Wind embrased and persuaded the Willow  to  go
with him to hot Egypt, but the Willow only slightly and sadly trembled
with her leaves.  Never would she be able to  travel  even  two  miles
away, and  so softly was rejected Wind's offer.  And Mavka remained in
the Forest,  not willing to leave her mother.  Simple had been Mavka's
life.  Her companions were just birds,  beasts and trees. This way she
lived before meeting the Mathematician -  speaking  the  Languages  of
Birds, Trees, Beasts, changing herself for a fun into whatever came to
her mind,  and doing many other things contradicting to  a  number  of
Theorems. For her excuse we should say that she was completely anaware
of the  Science,  so  all  these  violations  were  without  any  evil
intention from her side.

     But once Mathematician met her. They liked each other at once. To
please him she called for the  little  Sparrows  who  on  her  request
demonstrated  the first-rate flying.  She asked a little Bear to bring
the best Berries.  Then she turned into a tree,  into a  hedgehog  and
into a copy of Mathematician's book.

     "Alas! -  he  cried,  -  what are you doing?  Don't you know that
according to the Fundamentals of Physics, the Ivariants of Form cannot
be transformed!!  And  that Naturalists showed that the beasts have no
intellect altogether, but a set of reflexes".

     "I know not Physics but I know that  all  forest  beings  are  as

                                - 3 -
human as You or me:  when offended they cry,  when delighted they sing
merry songs,  when spoken to they speak.  They are very nice  to  play
with. They do like my "transformation"" - denied Mavka.

     But Mathematician repeated incessantly:  "Conservation of Energy,
Conservation of Matter, Conservation of Conservation..."

     "The simpliest creature, - he thought on the way home, - how poor
and  unattractive  her  life is!  How simple-minded she is!  She knows
nothing,  probably,  she cannot even read!  I think I should sacrifice
some of my precious time to educate her. That's a great service of me,
but for the sake of my love I will do everything."

     He started  Mavka's  education  next  day.  She learned very well
seing how proud and happy he became when she could tell A  from  B,  1
from 2, proper integrals from improper ones.

     Once Mavka  showed  the  integrals  to her best friend - Swallow.
Swallow looked at an Integral Sign,  pecked it (maybe  taking  it  for
worm), squeacked "Rubbish!" and flew away.

     "Today I  will  prove  The Great Brilliant Law of Conservation of
Enegry, Entropy and Matter Invariants, and therefore, as a consequence
show  that  your  form  is  stable  and  cannot  change to a form of a
different Metric" - so upliftedly and solenmly  started  Mathematician
one  lecture.  It  was  in  reallity  one  of  the  best his speeches.
Impressed,  Mavka imagined and felt how electrons  are  sternly  fixed
throughout  her body and how powerful nuclear forces prevent them from
unlawful movements.

     "And now,  try!" - he suggested. She tried... and couldn't. "What
was required to prove!" - he was delighted.  Certainly,  it  was  very
good that  his  Mavka  no  longer  was  an exception to rules but most
definitely confirm the truth of Theory.  He was happy and felt Harmony
and Sense of World.

     Yes, It  was  all  right,  her form was constant as it should be,
according to Physics. This form looked certainly very nice, but it was
not  always  convenient.  She could not any more to turn into a little
fish to play in the River and to make fun  of  the  bitter  Pike.  Nor
could she  fly above the Forest,  singing a happy bird's song.  In any
case she had no free time for a  number  of  thick  books  brought  by
Mathematician she had to study.  And, besides, Mathematician was happy
and that means uch to her.

     Then he  proved  that  the voices uttered by Birds and Beasts are
but random sounds with no meaning.  And she as if losted hearing. Only
Language of Trees she understood,  as it probably slipped out  of  his
mind that trees might speak. But there was little use of it: everybody

                                - 4 -
knows how slow are the trees, and, in fact, it takes them two hours to
creak a word.

     Then came Autumn. Mathematician caught a cold and, as he was very
sensitive to  weather,  decided  to  suspend  Mavka's  education  till
Spring.

     Winter brought  harsh cold.  For long wandered trembling Mavka in
searching for a place to hide.  Usually she turned into Stone and  lay
all Winter in warm Bears' den.  It is very important to turn just into
a very hard stone,  in  case  the  big  ÿ3hungry  ÿ0Bear  starts  to  gnaw
everything in the den. To Mavka it was the longest Winter in her life.
No doubts, lying motionlessly under warm Bear is much more pleasant.

     But, everything ends,  and the Winter ended.  The Spring started.
Mathematician resumed his lectures.

     That day  he  was  proving  that  no  tale-folks existed or would
exist. It was an absolutely correct  and  logical  proof  without  any
flaws. The only flaw was Mavka as a counterexample.  At first he was a
little reluctant to start the Theorem, but he has to do it for sake of
Truth and  his  Love.  "I  should  settle it out,  despite how painful
result I might receive", - he thought...

     "And as a consequence you do not exist",  - he concluded.  Nobody
answered.

     Only Swallow was flying over the  place,  and  little  Bear,  she
liked most,  growled.  It was really strange,  but little  tears  were
dropping out of Swallow's cheeks and Bear,  in fact,  was not growling
but crying.

     "Hey, you,  the beast and the bird.  You cannot cry,  You have no
human feelings!!"

     But, luckily, they didn't understand a word from it and continued
to mourn for Mavka, not knowing that they have no human feelings.

     "I have sacrificed my Love at the altar of Truth. I am a Scholar.
And that  is  true  Scholar's  duty  no matter how painful and hard" -
at last he remarked.

                                 < Zhovkva, Feb 5-7, 1995. >
